---
categories: misc
comments: true
date: 2014-02-26T20:18:03Z
title: Back it up
url: /2014/02/26/back-it-up/
---

For years I've been paying for [Backblaze](http://www.backblaze.com) in order to ensure
my photos, music, and other import data doesn't get lost in a hard drive crash, theft or fire.
I don't think I really need to go over all the reason why you should backup your data, do I?
But you should at least have a local backup, and ideally an offsite one too.

So why did I stop paying for Backblaze? No real reason. It came up to the renewal date
and I thought "I wonder if I can do this a little cheaper perhaps?". After all, I'm not
a stranger to technology.

<!--more-->

For Christmas I was lovingly gifted a 2TB 
[WD Mybook Live drive](http://www.wdc.com/en/products/products.aspx?id=280)
and thought this is what I will use for backups (amongst other things). To give you 
an overview of what I need to backup:

* Around 40GB of photos

I don't take a lot of photos, after all, I'm no professional, but those that I do
take are dear to me. So they need to be backed up

* MP3s

    Well, I actually have those on Google Play, so they are already kinda backed up.

* A few MB of documents
    
    The usual stuff like invoices, receipts, correspondence, etc

* A few GB of code
    
    It's what I do. So there's quite a bit of it, and not all of it is on Github.

This is all spread across an old iMac I rarely use and a MacBook Pro which is my 
daily use machine. I also want to have a local backup and an offsite backup. 

So first off I had to pick some software that will at least copy the relevant files
to the WD and create snapshots as a bonus. Because I'm an old command line lover, I
first opted for [rdiff-backup](http://www.nongnu.org/rdiff-backup/) which, after some
set up and testing, worked really well. I'd run the backup whenever I changed some 
important files, or at least once a week. Then, on Sunday I would rsync the backup onto 
a memory stick which I always have with me. 

This was fine until my connection dropped in the middle of
a backup operation. What happens then is that the target dir is corrupt and rdiff-backup
tries to roll back the recent backup. Which is fine in most cases, but in my case something
got stuck and it never completed the roll back.
I blew the directory away and started again, during which I looked at some alternatives (free),
seeing as I now had some time to kill.

First I thought "I can give this Time Machine thing a try. After all, it's free and
it's built right into the OS (sorta)". For some reason though it wouldn't let me select a mount
as a backup target. Probably because they don't want you backing your local disks to 
your local disks?

So that was out of the question. Then I thought I would checkout [Crashplan](http://www.crashplan.com)
as they were always coming up as an alternative to Backblaze and is also cross platform.
I checked out their free service which allows you to backup to a remote host, and
conveniently it also supports backing up to local folders.

So I downloaded it, did a basic setup and fired it off, along with an up-to-date
rdiff-backup. Both take a little bit of time as it's the first backup, but that doesn't 
bother me much, the incrementals will be quicker. What I wanted to know was how big the 
backup will be.

Surprisingly Crashplan's initial backup is over 1GB less than the rdiff-backup. I imagine
that it will get bigger, as I have it set to keep a longer history, but still, that's 
quite a saving. It also runs in the background, so no manual intervention needed. 
It'll just tick along and backup behind the scenes just like Backblaze did.

As for my offsite, I'll still use my USB stick with rdiff-backup mostly because
I need to copy the data onto a remote machine with rsync. Crashplan creates a single file for the backup
which will be a pain to copy each time. Using rsync to copy off an rdiff backup is
much quicker after the initial.

Summary
-------

So basically I am now running Crashplan locally having left Backblaze. I will say
that I would have stayed with Backblaze if I wasn't prone to tinkering and I 
wasn't averse shelling out a bit extra for a family plan. As it is, I can now 
backup all the machines in the house for the price of nothing 
(plus hardware accessories ;))

I've only been running it for a day so far, so time will tell if it's as good 
Backblaze, but so far this is the backup solution I am going with. I'll update
this post with any discoveries if they are minor, or write new posts if they
require a bit more space.


